2007 Rugby World Cup: Scotland and Fiji qualify for quarter finals

Saturday, September 29, 2007 
In the 2007 Rugby World Cup, Fiji and Scotland secured qualification to the knockout stage of the tournament with victories over Wales and Italy respectively. Elsewhere New Zealand defeated Romania and Australia defeated Canada. Both New Zealand and Australia had already qualified for the following round.
In Pool B, Fiji defeated Wales 38-34 in a dramatic encounter. Stephen Jones opened the scoring for Wales with a penalty, but Fiji raced to a 25-3 lead with tries from Akapusi Qera, Vilimoni Delasau and Kele Leawere and two penalties from Nicky Little. Wales fought back and took the lead after 51 minutes after Alix Popham ,Shane Williams, Gareth Thomas and Mark Jones each scored.
Nicky Little regained the lead for Fiji with two penalties, but Wales appeared to be heading to victory when Martyn Williams scored with seven minutes remaining. However Graham Dewes scored late on to snatch an extraordinary victory for Fiji to finish second in Pool B. Wales are knocked out of the tournament, but qualify automatically for the 2011 World Cup by finishing third in Pool B.
Australia, the winners of Pool B, beat Canada 37-6. An early penalty from Julian Huxley and tries from Al Baxter and Adam Freier gave Australia a 13-0 lead at half-time. James Pritchard scored two penalties for Canada, but George Smith, Drew Mitchell (2) Chris Latham all scored tries to complete Australia's victory.
Fiji face South Africa in the quarter finals while Australia will play defending champions England in a repeat of the 2003 final.
Scotland defeated Italy 18-16 to secure their place in the quarter finals. Chris Paterson scored all of Scotland's points by kicking six penalties. Italy were leading twenty minutes into the match after Alessandro Troncon scored a try and David Bortolussi added a penalty. Chris Paterson ensured Scotland's passage into the next round by kicking six penalties out of six. David Bortolussi closed the gap to two points with two penalties, but Scotland held on to finish second in Pool C. Italy finish third and qualify for the next World Cup despite being eliminated from the tournament.
Pool C winners New Zealand scored thirteen tries as they comfortably defeated Romania 85-8. Marius Tincu scored Romania's only try of the match, while Florin Vlaicu added a penalty. Joe Rokocoko scored a hat-trick of tries for the All Blacks, and Sitiveni Sivivatu and Isaia Toeava scored two each.



