2012 Olympics clash with Ramadan

Sunday, October 15, 2006 
Muslim groups from across the world are criticising the organisers of the 2012 Olympics in London after it was revealed that the games will take place over Ramadan. The most holy month in the Muslim calendar, which will take place from the 21 July to 20 August in 2012, involves fasting during daylight hours and will affect an estimated 3,000 athletes.
Joanna Manning Cooper, spokesman for the games said: "We did know about it when we submitted our bid and we have always believed that we could find ways to accommodate it." Nevertheless, this will come as a huge embarrassment for the organisers who have tried to ensure the event involve all of Britain's ethnic communities. A quarter of the athletes who took part in the 2004 Athens Olympics were from predominantly Muslim countries and the fast will put any athletes involved at a clear disadvantage.
The chairman of the Islamic Human Rights Commission, Massoud Shadjared said: "This is going to disadvantage the athletes and alienate the Asian communities by saying they don't matter. It's not only going to affect the participants, it's going to affect all the people who want to watch the games."
The president of the National Olympic Committee of Turkey, Togay Bayalti, said: "This will be difficult for Muslim athletes. They don't have to observe Ramadan if they are doing sport and travelling but they will have to decide whether it is important to them. "It would be nice for the friendship of the Games if they had chosen a different date."
The games will run from the 27 July to 12 August to coincide with the British Summer holidays. The summer holidays are a six week period running from mid July to early September. During this time, public transportation is generally less crowded and it will be easier to find the 70,000 volunteers needed to keep the games running. The International Olympics Committee has specified that the games must take place between July 15 to August 31. Giselle Davies, IOC spokesperson said, "We give a window to the five bid cities. The host city selects the dates within that window."
The organisers are working with the Muslim Council of Great Britain to find ways around the problem.
