2007 Rugby World Cup: South Africa, Australia and New Zealand qualify

Monday, September 24, 2007 
In the 2007 Rugby World Cup, the three major southern hemisphere nations secured qualification to the quarter final stage of the competition. Meanwhile, defending champions England kept their hopes alive with a comfortable 44-22 victory against Samoa, while Argentina pushed for the quarter finals with a comprehensive victory against Namibia.
In Pool A, South Africa overcame Tonga 30-25 after falling behind early in the second half. Having led 7-3 at half time thanks to a Ruan Pienaar try, the Springboks stumbled when Kisi Pulu scored a try for Tonga. However Juan Smith, Bobby Skinstad and Ruan Pienaar all added tries in the second half to secure a bonus point for South Africa. Tonga made a late breakthrough with two tries in quick succession from Sukanaivalu Hufanga and Viliami Vaki but it was not enough to overcome the deficit.
England defeated Samoa 44-22 to claim a vital bonus point and keep the defence of their title on track. Tries from Martin Corry and Paul Sackey helped England to a 23-12 lead at half time as Loki Crichton kept Samoa in the match with the boot. Junior Polu reduced the deficit to four points with a try for Samoa, but Corry and Sackey added tries for England while Jonny Wilkinson kicked 24 points to take England to victory.
Argentina scored nine tries in their 63-3 victory over Namibia. Morne Schreuder opened the scoring with a penalty for Namibia, but Argentina prevented them from scoring again. Argentina remain at the top of Pool D to stake a claim to a quarter final place.
Australia scored seven tries as they secured top spot in Pool B with a 55-12 victory over Fiji. Tries from Adam Ashley-Cooper and Stephen Hoiles, two from Matt Giteau and a hat trick from D Mitchell won the match for Australia. Fiji's only scores came from Isoa Neivua and Aca Ratuva but they never looked like threatening the Wallabies.
New Zealand did not concede any points as they defeated Scotland 40-0 to top Pool C. Scotland struggled against a dominant New Zealand side, who scored six tries. Richie McCaw, Doug Howlett (2), Byron Kelleher, Ali Williams and Daniel Carter were New Zealand's scorers.




