Argentina score in extra-time; beat Mexico, get to quarter-finals

Saturday, June 24, 2006 
An epic round sixteen contest between Argentina and Mexico was won by a work of genius from Maxi Rodriguez, Saturday.
The evenness and excitement of the match might easily be overshadowed by the winning goal. Though the shot totals were not high - Argentina had five shots on target to Mexico's three - the action was end to end.
Part of the reason for the excitement was while Mexico tried to keep a fast attacking pace Argentina attempted to slow the game down. There could have been more goals; both Argentina and Mexico defended well and had timely saves from their goalkeepers.
Mexico got off to the best possible start with a goal from a set-piece after five minutes. Pavel Pardo's cross from the right touchline was flicked on by Mario Mendez and Rafael Marquez slid in to score on a half volley at the far post.
For Argentina the equalising goal five minutes later was the best possible response to going behind. A corner kick was swung in low to the near post; Hernan Crespo raised his foot, Jared Borgetti stuck out his neck and between them the ball sped past Sanchez.
The match had its moment of controversy. Just before half time the Argentine goalkeeper rolled a ball to Gabriel Heinze. Somehow his defender let it go past him to Mexican striker Jose Fonseca. Heinze lunged to bring Fonseca down. Massimo Busacca adjudged Roberto Ayala to be the last defender and spared Heinze the red card for the deliberate professional foul.
Goalkeepers at either end made match saving contributions in the second half. On 53 minutes Roberto Abbondanzieri saved a defensive a clearance that deflected off Borgetti six yards from goal. Five minutes later Javier Saviola was through on goal; he went high and hard with the shot but Sanchez stuck out a strong left palm and batted the ball away for a corner.
Lionel Messi and Carlos Tevez replaced Crespo and Saviola as Argentina sought to break the deadlock. A minute from time Tevez thought he was through on goal but Ricardo Osorio got back just in time and the game was destined for another 30 minutes and that special moment in extra time.
Argentina's win meant they would play their quarter-final match in the Olympiastadion, Berlin, against the host nation Germany on June 30.
