65th running of the Aiken Trials held

Monday, March 19, 2007 
The 65th running of the Aiken Trials was held Saturday, on March 17th at the Aiken Training Track in South Carolina. The event consists of six horse races of a quarter mile to 4 1/2 furlongs that bring experience to new challengers in the field of racing competition.
Five of the races were for two-year-old horses and contenders that have not previously won. The sixth race is for horses who have never won a sweepstakes.
Orgainizers of the event looked to draw between 10 and 12,000 spectators. Tailgating, and a special VIP tent, along with live music and expanded food vendor services added to the event which has been growing each year. It is the first of three events that form the Aiken Triple Crown. The races began at 2 p.m and lasted until about 5 p.m.
The first trial, a quarter mile 2 year old maiden open, was won by Tigeroo owned by Dogwood Stable, ridden by Jessica Schultz and trained by Ron Stevens.
The second trial, a quarter mile race open to 2 yr old maiden colts and geldings, was won by Atrevido Bandito owned by Lansdon Robbins, ridden by Jessica Schultz and trained by Brad Stauffer.
The third trial, a quarter mile race open to 2 year old maiden colts, was won by Warriors Lass owned and trained by Carl Durr, ridden by Evequiel Lopez.
The forth trial a 4 1/2 Furlongs race open to 3 year old and up maiden colts and geldings was won by Private Nekia who is owned by Nekia Farm, ridden by Bruce Snipes and trained by Chad Frederick.
The fifth trial a 4 1/2 Furlongs race open to 3 year old and up maiden fillies and mares was won by Confederate Bond who is owned by Nekia Farm, ridden by Bruce Snipes and trained by Chad Frederick.
The sixth trial a 4 1/2 Furlongs race open to 3 year old and up that have never won a sweepstakes was won by Cyberflash who is owned by Nekia Farm, ridden by Bruce Snipes and trained by Chad Frederick. Cyberflash's time of 53 3/5 seconds matches the track record.
Carriages open the event

Share this:           

Got a correction? Add the template {{editprotected}} to the talk page along with your corrections, and it will be brought to the attention of the administrators.

