2007 Rugby World Cup: New Zealand, Australia and Ireland win

Saturday, September 15, 2007 
In the 2007 Rugby World Cup, New Zealand overwhelmed tournament newcomers Portugal. The All Blacks scored more than 100 points and 16 tries in their 108-13 victory to hold their position at the top of Pool C.
A dominant first half display from Australia saw them defeat Wales in Cardiff. A strong finish by Wales was not enough to prevent the Wallabies, who lead Pool B, winning 32-20 and picking up a bonus point.
Ireland came from behind to defeat a strong Georgian team 14-10 in Pool D. Georgia led early in the second half and were threatening to score late in the match but Ireland's defence held to secure the four point victory.

Joe Rokocoko scored two tries to open the scoring for New Zealand. Isaia Toeava, Ali Williams, Aaron Mauger, Jerry Collins, Chris Masoe and Andrew Hore each added tries as New Zealand ended the half with a 52-3 lead.
Gonçalo Malheiro kicked a drop goal in the 22nd minute to give Portugal, making their first appearance in the world cup, their only points of the half.
Rui Cordeiro scored Portugal's only try of the match shortly after the restart, which was converted by Duarte Cardoso Pinto. However tries from Brendon Leonard, Nick Evans, Andrew Ellis, Leon MacDonald, Carl Hayman and two from Conrad Smith completed New Zealand's victory.
Duarte Cardoso Pinto added a penalty for Portugal in the 75th minute. Nicky Evans scored 33 points in total for New Zealand, converting 14 tries and scoring one of his own.
New Zealand are top of Pool C with ten points, ahead of Scotland with 5 and Italy with 4. Portugal are bottom, behind Romania, with four points.

Wales improved in the second half. Jonathan Thomas scored a try and James Hook added the conversion and a penalty to cut the deficit to twelve points. However Chris Latham scored his second try of the match, and Australia's fourth, to restore their hold of the game and secure a bonus point. Shane Williams scored a try for Wales in the 76th minute after a strong finish, but it came too late and Australia won by twelve points.
Australia lead Pool B with ten points. Wales are second with five points, ahead of Fiji on points difference, while Japan have one point and Canada are bottom of the group with no points.

Georgia took a shock lead early in the second half, when Georgi Shkinin scored a try in the 45th minute. Merab Kvirikashvili converted, and Georgia led 10-7. Girvan Dempsey regained the lead for Ireland and another Ronan O'Gara conversion made the score 14-10. Georgia kept up the pressure on Ireland in the late stages of the game, twice reaching Ireland's try line, but they could not get through and Ireland managed to scrape through with a four point lead.
Ireland are second in Pool D with eight points, behind Argentina on nine. France are third with one point from their single match, while Georgia have one point from two defeats.

