"PGR4" pre-launch in Taiwan: TOP Drivers' Derby

Saturday, September 29, 2007 
After the launch of "Halo 3" on Tuesday (September 25), Microsoft promoted a brand new Xbox360 racing game "Project Gotham Racing 4" (PGR4) with a friendship match as a "TOP on TOP" competition between Taiwanese World Cyber Games (WCG) PGR3 Delegate You-cheng Liu and "Drift Master of Taiwan" Po-hsiung Chou at YAMAHA MotorTown in Taipei City, Taiwan.
Before the friendship match, Cary Chen (Senior Product Marketing Manager of Entertainment and Device Division, Microsoft Taiwan) show the new features on PGR4 to the press, VIPs, and guests and praised the "PGR" game series with the "Kudos" skill points. He remarked that in the "PGR4", not only joined new car type and racing motorcycles, but also add Dynamic Weather System feature for the performance of new different type experiences on weathers, driving, and racing lane.
Chen also remarked that PGR series is surely respected because of the racing game competition factor on WCG from 2006. This "PGR" series can realize lots of dreams of players on making some special skills which can't be done on reality. With the Xbox Live linking, PGR series has successfully made a great achievement.
After the presentation and demos, Microsoft Taiwan held a friendship match. Before the match, Y. C. Liu welcomed P. H. Chou with Chou drove a BMW car to the main entrance. After the entrance, the match started. With the witnesses of VIPs, press, and players, Liu won the friendship match by the turning fault of Chou. Even though Chou wanted to invite Live as a racer in reality after the match, but Liu temporarily declined with his consideration.
Microsoft Taiwan announced that the Chinese Version of "PGR4" will be available on October 5, and welcomed players competing with "I want 'PGR4' Helmet!" photo competition. And also, "Yamaha PGR4 Cup - Taiwan Driving Master Championship" will be held and set qualification section in October and final section in December of Information Month in Taipei.
